In addition to helping to overturn established ideas in physics and chemistry, Marie Curie's work has had a profound effect in the societal sphere. To attain Marie Curie's scientific achievements, Marie Curie had to overcome barriers, in both Marie Curie's native and Marie Curie's adoptive country, that were placed in Marie Curie's way because Marie Curie was a woman.
Marie Curie was known for Marie Curie's honesty and moderate lifestyle. Having received a small scholarship in 1893, Marie Curie returned it in 1897 as soon as Marie Curie began earning Marie Curie's keep. Marie Curie gave much of Marie Curie's first Nobel Prize money to friends, family, students, and research associates. In an unusual decision, Marie Curie intentionally refrained from patenting the radium-isolation process so that the scientific community could do research unhindered. Marie Curie insisted that monetary gifts and awards be given to the scientific institutions Marie Curie was affiliated with rather than to Marie Curie. Marie Curie and Marie Curie's husband often refused awards and medals. Albert Einstein reportedly remarked that Marie Curie was probably the only person who could not be corrupted by fame.

Commemoration and cultural depictions

Bust of "Maria Skłodowska-Curie", CERN Museum, Switzerland, 2015
As one of the most famous scientists in history, Marie Curie has become an icon in the scientific world and has received tributes from across the globe, even in the realm of pop culture. Marie Curie also received many honorary degrees from universities across the world.
Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, the first person to win two Nobel Prizes, the only woman to win in two fields, and the only person to win in multiple sciences. Awards and honours that Marie Curie received include:

Nobel Prize in Physics (1903, with her husband Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel
Davy Medal (1903, with Pierre)
Matteucci Medal (1904, with Pierre)
Actonian Prize (1907)
Elliott Cresson Medal (1909)
Legion of Honour (1909, rejected)
Nobel Prize in Chemistry (1911)
Civil Order of Alfonso XII (1919)
Franklin Medal of the American Philosophical Society (1921)
Order of the White Eagle (2018, posthumously)


Entities that have been named after Marie Curie include:

The curie (symbol Ci), a unit of radioactivity, is named in honour of Marie Curie and Pierre Curie (although the commission which agreed on the name never clearly stated whether the standard was named after Pierre, Marie, or both).
The element with atomic number 96 was named curium (symbol Cm).
Three radioactive minerals are also named after the Curies: curite, sklodowskite, and cuprosklodowskite.
The Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions fellowship program of the European Union for young scientists wishing to work in a foreign country
In 2007, a metro station in Paris was renamed to honour both of the Curies.
The sole Polish nuclear reactor in operation, the research reactor Maria
The 7000 Curie asteroid
Marie Curie, a registered charitable organisation in the United Kingdom
The IEEE Marie Sklodowska-Curie Award, an international award presented for outstanding contributions to the field of nuclear and plasma sciences and engineering, was established by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in 2008.
The Marie Curie Medal, an annual science award established in 1996 and conferred by the Polish Chemical Society
The Marie Curie–Sklodowska Medal and Prize, an annual award conferred by the London-based Institute of Physics for distinguished contributions to physics education
Maria Curie-Skłodowska University in Lublin, Poland
Pierre and Marie Curie University in Paris
Maria Skłodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology in Poland
École élémentaire Marie-Curie in London, Ontario, Canada; Curie Metropolitan High School in Chicago, United States; Marie Curie High School in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam; Lycée français Marie Curie de Zurich, Switzerland; see Lycée Marie Curie for a list of other schools named after her
Rue Madame Curie in Beirut, Lebanon.
Numerous biographies are devoted to her, including:

Ève Curie (Marie Curie's daughter), Madame Curie, 1938.
Françoise Giroud, Marie Curie: A Life, 1987.
Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life, 1996.
Barbara Goldsmith, Obsessive Genius: The Inner World of Marie Curie, 2005.
Lauren Redniss, Radioactive: Marie and Pierre Curie, a Tale of Love and Fallout, 2011, adapted into the 2019 British film.
Marie Curie has been the subject of a number of films:

1943: Madame Curie, a U.S. Oscar-nominated film by Mervyn LeRoy starring Greer Garson.
1997: Les Palmes de M. Schutz, a French film adapted from a play of the same title, and directed by Claude Pinoteau. Marie Curie is played by Isabelle Huppert. 2014: Marie Curie, une femme sur le front, a French-Belgian film, directed by Alain Brunard  and starring Dominique Reymond.
2016: Marie Curie: The Courage of Knowledge, a European co-production by Marie Noëlle starring Karolina Gruszka.
2016: Super Science Friends, an American Internet animated series created by Brett Jubinville featuring Hedy Gregor as Marie Curie.
2019: Radioactive, a British film by Marjane Satrapi starring Rosamund Pike.
Marie Curie is the subject of the 2013 play False Assumptions by Lawrence Aronovitch, in which the ghosts of three other women scientists observe events in Marie Curie’s life. Marie Curie has also been portrayed by Susan Marie Frontczak in her play, Manya: The Living History of Marie Curie, a one-woman show which by 2014 had been performed in 30 U.S. states and nine countries. Lauren Gunderson's 2019 play The Half-Life of Marie Curie portrays Marie Curie during the summer after her 1911 Nobel Prize victory, when Marie Curie was grappling with depression and facing public scorn over the revelation of Marie Curie’s affair with Paul Langevin.

Marie Curie has appeared on more than 600 postage stamps in many countries across the world.

Between 1989–1996, Marie Curie was featured on a 20,000-zloty banknote designed by Andrzej Heidrich. In 2011, a commemorative 20-zloty banknote depicting Marie Curie was issued by the National Bank of Poland on the 100th anniversary of the scientist receiving the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

