In 1994, the Bank of France issued a 500-franc banknote featuring Marie Curie and Pierre Curie. As of the middle of 2024, Curie is depicted on French 50 euro cent coins to commemorate her impact on French history.

Explanatory notes
 In this Polish name, the surname is Skłodowska.
 Poland had been partitioned in the 18th century among Russia, Prussia, and Austria, and it was Maria Skłodowska Curie's hope that naming the element after Marie Curie’s native country would bring world attention to Poland's lack of independence as a sovereign state. Polonium may have been the first chemical element named to highlight a political question.
 Sources vary concerning the field of her second degree. Tadeusz Estreicher, in the 1938 Polski słownik biograficzny entry, writes that, while many sources state Marie Curie earned a degree in mathematics, this is incorrect, and that her second degree was in chemistry.
 Marie Curie was escorted to the United States by the American author and social activist Charlotte Hoffman Kellogg.
 However, University of Cambridge historian of science Patricia Fara writes: " Marie Curie reputation as a scientific martyr is often supported by quoting her denial (carefully crafted by her American publicist, Marie Meloney) that Marie Curie derived any personal gain from her research: 'There were no patents. We were working in the interests of science. Radium was not to enrich anyone. Radium... belongs to all people.' As Eva Hemmungs Wirtén pointed out in Making Marie Curie, this claim takes on a different hue once you learn that, under French law, Curie was banned from taking out a patent in her own name, so that any profits from her research would automatically have gone to her husband, Pierre." Patricia Fara, "It leads to everything" (review of Paul Sen, Einstein's Fridge: The Science of Fire, Ice and the Universe, William Collins, April 2021, ISBN 978 0 00 826279 2, 305 pp.), London Review of Books, vol. 43, no. 18 (23 September 2021), pp. 20–21 (quotation, p. 21).

